---
title: 
date: 2017-11-17 19:30:00 -0700
categories: [web development]
tags: [reflection, journal]
---
* Site with brief description and features
* Talk about Chingu and why I joined
* Benefits and challenges of a team environnent
* What I learned by doing things I never had and were well outside my comfort zone.

This past Tuesday evening, the team project that has enveloped all of my free time has launched. [Wanderful](http://www.wanderful-travel.com) is a random travel destination site built on the MERN technology stack. Users are able to visit the site and click a button on the landing page to discover details about a randomized destination stored in our database. Here they can get a quick blurb about the location, and information about various points of interest including: hotels, restaurants, entertainment, and the ability to check flights to get to the location. If a user creates an account with the site they are able to save their favorite destinations and POIs where they can easily view them on their favorites dashboard. If a user desires to get any more information about a give POI, they can click on the given item to have the Yelp details for that location open in a new window.

## Begin Initialization

Prior to this application, I had never built a large scale application other than this website, which in comparison is basic. I had never built a full-stack application, only frontend applications. Lastly, I had never been part of a team to build out a project. All of these are areas that I knew I needed to grow into in my pressing job search for a web developer job. Enter [Chingu](ADD LINK!!!). Chingu is a worldwide group started by Chance LASTNAME?? with the focus on connecting developers together to build a project together to advance their learning paths. It is completely free, ticked off all the boxes that I was looking for, and I decided to jump into it headfirst. I was paired with a team of two other developers of a similar skillset, and after our first meeting we had solidifed the conceptual idea which evolved into Wanderful. Over the next 6 weeks we worked on building out the concept from scratch.

Working on a larger scale project as part of a team, was a very valuable experience both in terms of what we were able to accomplish together and the logistics of working on the same project at the same time. Consistent communication was essential to make sure that we were working synchornously, and also to avoid touching the same files simultaneously to reduce the number of merge conflicts. It also encouraged better code commenting and making the logical flow clear and understandable to others who may rely on the code for another feature. One of the really rewarding experiences for me personally was to spend a substantial amount of time on a given feature and then be able to walk through and explain the branch to my teammates. This helped to solidify my understanding of the concepts and find the best way to explain why I used the methods that I did.

We decided to build our project on the MERN (MongoDB, Express, React, and Node) stack with each of us having varying levels of experience on different portions of the stack. We also knew that there would be some significant data management within the application and planned to use Redux early on in the project. For the visual design we landed on using [Material UI components](ADD LINK). Now that we had the tech stack determined, it was time to start actually building the thing.

## Making a Courageous Leap

As we were discussing the tasks that needed to be implemented to begin building out the project, I kept on being drawn to the concept of local user authentication over using OAuth. I pushed to working on that and some of the other backend portions of the project, recognizing that I had never implemented any features like this, or built anything beyond a frontend application. Then again, stretching myself and concretely learning new things through building was exactly why I joined the cohort in the first place. Previously I had done some tutorials on working in the backend and built some microservices, but that was were my experience stopped.

As I poured over the documentation for [Passport.js](ADD LINK) and started installing packages left and right, it became readily apparent that there was going to be a lot of trial and error involved in setting this up. Each package had multiple dependencies that required specific configuration in order for each to work, before I even reached being able to run the authentication logic. To make matters more interesting, I found that the out of the box setup for Passport wasn't working the way I wanted with the frontend, using React and React Router. In order to resolve this issue, I dove further into the documentation and implemented my own custom callback solution which resolved that matter. After a week or so of working away on it during the commute and evenings, I finally had it all sorted out. Creating and merging in that Pull Request was exhilirating. Before I would become so excited and proud of completing a simple project that was about 300 lines of code. The final authentication feature PR was over 400 lines of code.

After completing the authentication features, I moved on to creating the functionality of a user being able to store their favorite hotels and points of interest. Building out the backend logic for this went fairly smoothly. We utilized the Yelp API to fetch data for all of the places in each location. The Yelp API already provided a unique ID field in their response, which I was able to capitalize on by storing it in an array on the user model. When the backend API endpoint was hit, all it would need to do is check if the Yelp ID was already in the array and add or pull it as needed. We went with storing just the Yelp ID of each location in the user model to maintain fresh data each time the user visits the site. Thankfully, the Yelp API provides a generous number of requests. However, clearly we needed an efficient means of storing the populated data for ready access by the front end; it was time to conquer my hesitation with Redux.

I don't know what it was about Redux that perplexed me so much, but I couldn't quite wrap my head around the concept before the project. I didn't understand why it would be necessary and what good it was for if the data was lost when the app refreshed. Of course, previously my React applications had only gone one or two levels deep and rarely consisted of more than 5 components. Even before I started trying to hook up Redux for this project, it was clear why it would be necessary. There was substantially more complications and deeper nesting of components that would have been a nightmare to pass state down to and also create functions to modify the state of the parent components from the children components. Additionally the data would be shared across different entirely different routes and component structures. I began working on setting up the Redux actions and connecting different parts of the UI to the Redux store. There were several points of revelation of the power of Redux in increasing complexity along the way.

* I created an auth state which stored whether the user was logged in or not. Initially this selectively rendered the header component to show Register/Login or Logout buttons.
* I created a favorites state which stored all of the details retrieved from the Yelp API for each of the locations a user favorited. This state was kept in sync with the backend when locations were added or removed from the User model.
* On each details page there is a heart for the respective location that we wanted to fill in or have outlined to represent if it was currently a favorite. I was able to utilize the existing auth state which held the raw Yelp ID arrays to migrate to a more performant array includes check.
* I implemented isFetching boolean flags in various pieces of state to allow rendering of progress loaders while the data is being fetched. 